Task-switching behavioral paradigm

We designed a behavioral paradigm associated with multiple cognitive processes. In this paradigm, head-fixed mice performed two directional licking tasks that alternated block-wise within each behavioral session. These tasks varied in their cognitive demands but required the same instructed motor output.

This paradigm included an established delayed-response (DR) task in which motor planning is temporally dissociated from movement execution (Fig. 1a). In the DR task, an auditory stimulus indicated the location of a reward. After a brief delay epoch with no auditory stimuli, a separate auditory ‘go cue’ instructed the mouse to move. If the mouse performed a directional tongue movement to the correct target, a water reward was delivered. In separate blocks of trials, mice performed a water-cued (WC) task in which all auditory stimuli were omitted. Instead, a drop of water was presented at a random point in time at a randomly selected reward port. Animals consumed water upon its presentation. Mice received no explicit cues signaling DR and WC blocks. The DR task required a perceptual decision that guides the planning of a subsequent motor action. In the WC task, uncertainty in the timing and location of reward prevented formation of a motor plan before reward presentation, and, instead, mice detected reward availability using olfactory and/or vibrissal cues. This structure required animals to maintain an internal representation of the current block identity (context) to maintain high task performance.

We examined uninstructed movements in this behavioral paradigm using high-speed video. We tracked movement of the tongue, jaw, nose and paws and calculated instantaneous motion energy to quantify movement in a feature-agnostic manner (Fig. 1d–f). We found that mice performed uninstructed movements that varied in their identity and timing across both trials and contexts (Fig. 1e and Supplementary Movie 1).

To assess cortical involvement in instructed movements (directional licking) in both behavioral tasks, we used optogenetic photoinactivation to inhibit the ALM and tjM1 at the go cue (DR) or water presentation (WC) bilaterally in VGAT-ChR2-EYFP mice (10 sessions, four mice). Simultaneous photoinactivation of both regions at the go cue (DR task) or water drop (WC task) impaired the initiation of movement in both contexts (Fig. 1b,c; all DR trials: 41 ± 20% reduction, mean ± s.d., P = 1 × 10−4; all WC trials: 15 ± 20%, P = 0.04; and Extended Data Fig. 1c,d). To assess cortical involvement in the expression of uninstructed movements, and whether these movements might be controlled by ALM or tjM1 preferentially, we bilaterally silenced the ALM or tjM1 individually during the delay epoch of DR trials (ALM: 15 sessions, tjM1: nine sessions, four mice). Uninstructed movements were suppressed by photoinactivation of either area (Extended Data Fig. 1b; ALM: 53 ± 31% reduction, mean ± s.d., P = 3 × 10−4; tjM1: 62 ± 24% reduction, P = 2 × 10−3, paired t-test) and more strongly suppressed by concurrent photoinactivation of both areas (Fig. 1g,h; 29 sessions, four mice; 73 ± 35% reduction, mean ± s.d., P = 7 × 10−9, paired t-test), similar to previous observations21 (but see ref. 34). In the DR task, delay photoinactivation of both areas led to a significant decrease in overall performance (Fig. 1i; 22% ± 14% reduction, mean ± s.d., P = 2 × 10−6 paired t-test; Extended Data Fig. 1b) as expected from the disruption of choice/planning dynamics, often leading to animals responding consistently to a preferred side rather than in a manner commensurate with the sensory cue. These results indicate that both the ALM and tjM1 are involved in the generation of uninstructed movements and the planning and execution of instructed directional tongue movements in the two-context paradigm.

Neural dynamics related to task variables

While movement-related and task-related information is encoded in both the ALM and tjM1 in the DR task and other directional licking tasks33, task variables are more strongly represented in the ALM33,36, and so we focused our subsequent analyses there. We recorded activity extracellularly in the ALM with high-density silicon probes during the two-context paradigm to track dynamics associated with planning, context and the execution of movements (Fig. 2; two-context paradigm: 12 sessions, six mice, 522 units, including 214 well-isolated single units; an additional three mice were trained only on the DR task: 25 sessions, nine mice, 1,651 units, including 483 well-isolated single units; see Extended Data Fig. 2a for per-session statistics). In the DR task, we found that choice selectivity (right versus left DR trials) was widespread across all task epochs as expected (sample: 36%; delay: 42%; response: 58% of 483 single units; 25 sessions, nine mice). Individual units showed a variety of activity patterns across trial types, including delay epoch preparatory activity, which has often been taken to be a neural signature of motor planning32,37 (Fig. 2b, left). Individual units were also selective for behavioral context during all task epochs, including during the inter-trial interval (ITI) (39% of single units, 12 sessions, six mice, 214 single units), suggesting persistent coding of context (Fig. 2b, right).

Methods

Mouse behavior

Behavioral training was conducted using custom scripts written for Bpod r0.5 (https://www.sanworks.io/shop/products.php?productFamily=bpod). All mice used in experiments were first trained on the DR task with a fixed delay epoch until they reached at least 70% accuracy. At the beginning of each trial, one of two auditory tones lasting 1.3 s was played; the tone indicating a ‘right’ trial was white noise, and the tone indicating a ‘left’ trial was a pure tone (8-kHz pulses). The delay epoch (0.9 s for 12 mice, 0.7 s for one mouse and linearly time warped to 0.9 s) started after the completion of the sample tone. After the delay epoch, an auditory go cue was played (swept-frequency cosine (chirp), 10 ms), after which animals were rewarded with approximately 3 µl of water for contacting the correct lickport. Lickport contacts before the response epoch resulted in the current task epoch restarting, ensuring that they could not progress to the next task epoch until they had stopped licking for the specified length of the current epoch. If the animal did not respond within 3 s of the go cue, this was considered an ‘ignore’ trial, although responses were typically registered within 300 ms of the go cue.

Mice used for the two-context task (Figs. 1, 2, 4 and 8 and Extended Data Figs. 1–3 and 9) were introduced to the WC context after they were fully trained on the DR context and at least 2 d before the first electrophysiology recording session. A behavioral session began with approximately 100 DR trials and was then followed by alternating blocks of WC and DR trials. Each interleaved block was 10–25 trials, with no fixed block duration. All sessions started with DR trials. Pilot sessions beginning with WC trials had to be terminated early due to a high ‘ignore’ rate, likely due to the mouse becoming sated early in the session. In a WC trial, all auditory cues were omitted, and an approximately 3-µl water reward was presented randomly from either lickport. Trials in which the animal contacted the lickport before the reward (‘early lick’) were omitted from analyses. ITIs were randomly drawn from an exponential distribution with mean 1.5 s. There were no explicit cues during the ITI to indicate to the animal which context block it was in.

For the randomized delay task (Fig. 3g,h,i), mice were first fully trained on the fixed delay DR task (delay duration of 0.9 s). The delay epoch length was then randomized; the duration for each trial was randomly selected from six possible values (0.3 s, 0.6 s, 1.2 s, 1.8 s, 2.4 s and 3.6 s). The probability of each delay duration being selected was assigned such that it resembled a probability density function of an exponential distribution with τ = 0.9 s, as in ref. 44. Animals were trained on this version of the task until they became experts (>70% accuracy and <20% early lick rate).

Videography analysis

High-speed video was captured (400-Hz frame rate) from two cameras (FLIR, Blackfly monochrome camera, BFS-U3-16S2M-CS). One provided a side view of the mouse, and the other provided a bottom view. We tracked the movements of specific body features using DeepLabCut (Figs. 1, 3 and 4). The tongue, jaw and nose were tracked using both cameras, whereas the paws were tracked using only the bottom view. Position and velocity of each tracked feature was calculated from each camera. The x and y position of each kinematic feature was extracted from the output of DeepLabCut. Missing values were filled in with the nearest available value for all features, except for the tongue. The velocity of each feature was then calculated as the first-order derivative of the position vector. Tongue angle and length were found using the bottom camera. Tongue angle was defined as the angle between the vector pointing from the jaw to the tip of the tongue and the vector defining the direction the mouse was facing. Tongue length was calculated as the Euclidean distance from the jaw to the tip of the tongue.

Motion energy

The motion energy for a given frame and pixel was defined as the absolute value of the difference between the median value of the pixel across the next five frames (12.5 ms) and the median value of the pixel across the previous five frames (12.5 ms). Motion energy for each frame was then converted to a single value by taking the 99th percentile (~700 pixels) of motion energy values across the frame. Motion energy calculated in this manner was high during overt movements over small regions of pixel space, such as during whisking, while remaining relatively low during passive respiration that corresponded to subtle motion across the animal’s body. A threshold above which an animal was classed as moving was defined on a per-session basis manually. Motion energy distributions, per session, were bimodal, showing a large peak with little variance at low motion energy values and a second, smaller peak with high variance at large values. The threshold was set as the motion energy value separating these two modes. We found that this method of setting the threshold captured both short-duration and long-duration movements. Alternative methods, such as defining a baseline period of no movement against which to compare, were less successful due to the variability in timing of the movements across trials.

Photoinactivation experiments

Optogenetic photoinactivation was deployed on approximately 30% of trials selected at random. A ‘masking flash’ (470-mm LEDs; LUXEON Rebel LED) controlled by an Arduino Teensy microcontroller (100-ms pulses at 10 Hz) was delivered constantly for the duration of the session to prevent mice from differentiating control and photoinactivation trials. A 488-nm laser (Coherent, OBIS 488-nm LX 150-mW laser system) was used for all photoinactivation experiments. ChR2-assisted photoinactivation (Fig. 1b,c,g and Extended Data Fig. 1b–d) was performed through a cranial window (see ‘Surgical procedures’ subsection), which replaced bone over the frontal cortex. Light was delivered either at the start of the delay epoch or at the start of the response epoch (only one epoch tested per session). A power density of 1.5 mW mm−2 was used for all photoinactivation experiments.

For delay epoch photoinactivation (Fig. 1g–i and Extended Data Fig. 1b), light was delivered at the onset of the delay epoch and lasted for 0.6 s, followed by a 0.2-s linear ramp down. We targeted one of three regions per session: bilateral motor cortex (ALM and tjM1), bilateral ALM or bilateral tjM1. A scanning galvo system (Thorlabs, GPS011) was used to simultaneously target both hemispheres by scanning at 40 Hz. The beam (2-mm diameter) was centered around the following locations: ALM (AP 2.5 mm, ML 1.5 mm), tjM1 (AP 1.75 mm, ML 2.25 mm) and motor cortex (that is, ALM and tjM1; AP 2.25 mm, ML 1.85 mm). Due to their proximity, when specifically targeting ALM or tjM1, Kwik-Cast (World Precision Instruments) was applied to the surrounding regions to prevent photoinactivation of other regions. For photoinactivation at the go cue or water drop (Fig. 1b,c and Extended Data Fig. 1c,d), light was delivered to the motor cortex for 0.8 s, followed by a 0.2-s ramp down beginning at the go cue/water drop presentation.


Electrophysiology recordings

Extracellular recordings were performed in the ALM using one of two types of silicon probes: H2 probes, which have two shanks, each with 32 channels with 25-µm spacing (Cambridge Neurotech), or Neuropixels 1.0 (ref. 59), which have one shank and allow recording from 384 channels arranged in a checkerboard pattern (IMEC). For recordings with H2 probes, the 64-channel voltage signals were multiplexed using a Whisper recording system (Neural Circuits, LLC), recorded on a PXI-8133 board (National Instruments) and digitized at 14 bits. The signals were demultiplexed into 64 (for H2 probes) or 384 (for Neuropixels 1.0) voltage traces sampled at 25 kHz and stored for offline analysis.

At least 6 h before recording, a small craniotomy (1–1.5-mm diameter) was made over the ALM (AP 2.5 mm, ML 1.5 mm). Then, 2–5 recordings were performed on a single craniotomy on consecutive days. After inserting the probes between 900 µm and 1,100 µm (New Scale Technologies, MPM System), brain tissue was allowed to settle for at least 5 min before starting recordings. All recordings were made using SpikeGLX (https://github.com/billkarsh/SpikeGLX, phase3a release).

Behavioral analysis

Behavioral data were collected using Bpod r0.5 (https://www.sanworks.io/shop/products.php?productFamily=bpod). All sessions used for behavioral analysis had at least 40 correct DR trials for each direction (left or right) and 20 correct WC trials for each direction, excluding early lick and ignore trials, which were omitted from all analyses. To assess the impact of ALM photoinactivation on movement initiation, we first calculated the percent of trials with a correct lick within 600 ms of the go cue/water drop (Fig. 1c). To find the fraction of time with the tongue visible during the photoinactivation period (Extended Data Fig. 1d), for each trial we found the number of timepoints within the 1 s after the go cue/water drop where the tongue was labeled as visible by DeepLabCut and divided that by the total number of timepoints within the photoinactivation period. This was then averaged for all control or photoinactivation trials for a given session.

To assess the impact of bilateral motor cortex/ALM/tjM1 photoinactivation during the delay epoch, the average motion energy during the delay epoch was calculated separately for right and left control versus photoinactivation trials (Fig. 1h and Extended Data Fig. 1b).

Electrophysiology recording analysis

JRCLUST (https://github.com/JaneliaSciComp/JRCLUST, version 4.1.0) and/or Kilosort 3 (ref. 61) (https://github.com/MouseLand/Kilosort) with manual curation using Phy 2 (https://github.com/cortex-lab/phy) were used for spike sorting. A unit was considered a well-isolated single unit based on manual inspection of its inter-spike interval (ISI) histogram, separation from other units and its stationarity across the session. Units that passed manual curation but had a higher ISI violation rate were called multiunits. Recording sessions were included for analysis only if they had at least 10 units (see Extended Data Fig. 2 for a distribution of neuron counts across sessions). For the DR task, we recorded 1,651 units (483 single units) in ALM from 25 sessions using nine mice. In 12 sessions from six mice, animals performed the two-context task. In total, 522 units (214 well-isolated single units) were recorded in these sessions. Finally, for the randomized delay task, we recorded 845 units (288 well-isolated single units) in ALM from 19 sessions using four mice. For subspace alignment (Figs. 5g,n, 7d,h and 8d) and single-unit selectivity analyses (Fig. 3g and Extended Data Fig. 4c), only well-isolated single units with firing rates exceeding 1 Hz were included. All units with firing rates exceeding 1 Hz were included in all other analyses.

To find choice-selective neurons, 40 trials were subsampled for both right and left correct trials, and a rank-sum test was used to compare spike counts for each unit during the sample, delay or response epochs. Selective units were those with significantly different spike counts (P < 0.05) during a given epoch. Context-selective units were defined in a two-step process to ensure that we were not conflating context selectivity with slow changes in animal engagement/motivation over each session. First, 40 trials each were subsampled for DR and WC trials, and spike counts were compared (P < 0.05, rank-sum test) during the ITI (the 300 ms preceding the sample tone onset) when the animal received no external cues to indicate which context it was in. Because sessions always began with a DR block and often ended with a WC block, it is possible that differences in firing rates across contexts defined in this way could be representing time within the session. To account for this, for each unit identified in the first step, we calculated the difference in spike rate for each pair of DR and WC blocks (for example, a session with five blocks, DR–WC–DR–WC–DR, would have nPairs = 4 adjacent, overlapping block pairs) and included units as context selective only if their preferred context (context with a higher spike rate) was the same for at least nPairs − 1 of the block pairs.

Selectivity in the neural population (Extended Data Fig. 4c) was calculated as the difference in spike rate on preferred − non-preferred trials in choice-selective units, with preferred trials referring to the trial type with a higher spike rate for each unit.
