Similar to previous work, we designed a visual discrimination task in head-fixed mice running through linear virtual reality corridors (Fig. 1a). Mice had to discriminate between visual texture patterns in two corridors; these corridors were repeated in pseudo-random order. The visual patterns in each corridor were obtained as ‘frozen’ crops from large photographs of naturalistic textures. For simplicity, we denote the stimuli as ‘leaf’ and ‘circle’, even though other visual stimuli were also used in some mice (‘rock’ and ‘bricks’; see Methods and Extended Data Fig. 1a). The visual stimuli were spatial frequency matched between categories to encourage the use of higher-order visual features in discrimination. A sound cue was presented at a random position inside each corridor and was followed by the availability of water in rewarded trials only (Fig. 1a). After approximately 2 weeks of training (Fig. 1b), mice demonstrated selective licking in the rewarded corridor in anticipation of reward delivery (Fig. 1c,d; error bars on all figures represent s.e.m.). After learning, we introduced unrewarded test stimuli ‘leaf2’ and ‘circle2’, which were different frozen crops of the same photographs. We then continued training with unrewarded leaf2 until the mice stopped licking to this stimulus, at which point we introduced another test stimulus (‘leaf3’) as well as spatially shuffled versions of leaf1 (Fig. 1b).

Mice in the unsupervised cohort also ran through the same corridors for similar periods of time, but did not receive water rewards and were not water restricted. We also studied a cohort of mice that ran through a virtual reality corridor with gratings on the walls. These served as a control to show the effect of simple exposure to virtual reality, independent of the image patterns shown. To ensure that all mice had a comparable visual experience, we fixed the speed of the virtual reality when mice ran faster than a speed threshold, and kept the virtual reality stationary otherwise. The overall running speeds were similar before and after learning, and between the task and unsupervised cohorts (Extended Data Fig. 2). We only considered timepoints during running for analysis, which removed time periods when the task mice stopped to collect water rewards.

Before and after learning, we recorded from large neural populations across many visual areas simultaneously using a two-photon mesoscope (Fig. 1e). We ran Suite2p on this data to obtain the activity traces from 20,547 to 89,577 neurons in each recording.

It is possible that the neural plasticity that we observed was due to spatial learning and navigation signals, which have been found to modulate firing rates even in the visual cortex. Alternatively, the neural plasticity might be due to adaptation to the visual statistics of the natural images that we presented. To distinguish between a spatial and a visual plasticity hypothesis, we next introduced two unrewarded test stimuli, leaf2 and circle2, which contained similar visual features to leaf1 and circle1, respectively, but were arranged in different spatial configurations (Fig. 2a). 

Methods

We performed 89 recordings in 19 mice bred to express GCaMP6s in excitatory neurons: TetO-GCaMP6s × camK2a-tTa mice.

The mice were free to run on an air-floating ball.

Visual stimuli

We showed virtual reality corridors to the mice on three perpendicular LED tablet screens, which surrounded each mouse (covering 270° of their visual field of view). To present the stimuli, we used PsychToolbox-3 in MATLAB. The virtual reality corridors were each 4 m long, with 2 m of grey space between corridors. The corridors were shown in a random order. The mice moved forward in the virtual reality corridors by running faster than a threshold of 6 cm s−1, but the virtual corridors always moved at a constant speed (60 cm s−1) as long as mice kept running faster than the threshold. Running was detected using an optical tracking sensor placed close to the ball.

The virtual reality corridors were created by concatenating four random crops from one of four large texture images: circle, leaf, rock and brick (Extended Data Fig. 1a). Grating stimuli (with angles of 0° and 45°) were also used to create the virtual reality corridors for a subset of mice (‘unsupervised gratings’ and VRg mice).

For behaviour-only experiments, each mouse was trained with rewards on one random pair of stimuli, such as leaf–circle or rock–brick. Mice with unsupervised pretraining (VRn mice) were pretrained on the same pair on which they were trained with rewards.

For imaging experiments, mice from both the task and the unsupervised cohorts were only trained on or exposed to one pair of stimuli, such as leaf–circle or rock–brick. For the mice exposed to the grating stimuli, we presented more than one pair of naturalistic stimuli before and after exposure to the gratings stimuli and recorded the neural responses to the naturalistic stimuli pairs, so each mouse can have more than one imaging session before and after. We also presented more than one pair of naturalistic stimuli to the naive mice, so each naive mouse can have more than one imaging session for testing naive responses.

The two different types of leaf1-swap stimuli (Extended Data Figs. 6f and 7a) were introduced separately for task mice but are pooled together for statistics analysis. The two leaf1-swap stimuli were introduced in the same session for unsupervised and naive mice, but were treated as two different data points and pooled together for statistical analyses.

Behavioural training

All animals were handled via refined handling techniques for at least 3 days before being acclimated to head fixation on the ball. Animals were acclimated gradually (0.5–1 h per day) on the ball over at least 3 days until they could be head fixed without exhibiting any signs of distress. Then, animals began a running training regiment (1 h per day), which lasted for at least 5 days to ensure they could run smoothly and continuously on the ball before being exposed to the closed-loop virtual linear corridor. For water-restricted mice, we trained them for 2 days to get used to acquiring water from the spout when no stimulus was presented, before the virtual reality + reward training session. The VRn and VRg pretraining groups of mice (Fig. 5) were trained to acquire water from the spout on the last 2 days of unsupervised pretraining with no stimuli presented, after the virtual reality session ended to avoid the associative learning between stimuli and rewards. For the group without pretraining (Fig. 5), learning to get reward from the spout was similarly carried out after the running training session on the last 2 days of running training.

For the behaviour-only experiment, all animals started training in the virtual reality + reward training session on a Monday and continued training for exactly 5 days. The first day of training consisted of passive reward training, during which the reward was always delivered to the mouse in the rewarded corridor at the beginning of the reward zone. The next 4 days consisted of active reward training, during which the mice were required to lick in the reward zone to trigger the reward. This ensured a consistent training schedule during the critical learning period. The beginning of the reward zone was randomly chosen per trial from a uniform distribution between 2 m and 3 m, and continued until the end of the corridor. This meant that the earliest position in the rewarded corridor in which the mouse can receive the reward was a range of 2–3 m.

For imaging mice, the sound cue was presented in all trial types, for task and unsupervised mice, and the time of the sound cue was randomly chosen per trial from a uniform distribution between positions 0.5 m and 3.5 m. For task mice, the sound cue indicated the beginning of the reward zone in the rewarded corridor. The reward was delivered if a lick was detected after the sound cue in the rewarded corridor. As mice kept licking (anticipatory licking) as soon as they entered the reward corridors and learned to lick right after the sound cue, the reward delivery locations were also approximately uniformly distributed between 0.5 m and 3.5 m (Fig. 1c). In some mice, the reward was delivered passively with a delay after the sound cue, but these mice still showed anticipatory licking before the sound cue. To rule out whether the licking was due to detecting signals related to the reward delivery, such as water coming out the spout or sound produced by solenoid valve, we considered a lick response if the mouse licked at least once inside the corridor but before the sound cue. Although the rewards were absent, the sound cue was still presented in the unsupervised training experiment for consistency.

Processing of calcium imaging data

Calcium imaging data were processed using Suite2p32, available on GitHub (www.github.com/MouseLand/suite2p). Suite2p performs motion correction, region of interest detection, cell classification, neuropil correction and spike deconvolution as previously described64. For non-negative deconvolution, we used a timescale of decay of 0.75 s (ref. 65). All our analyses were based on deconvolved fluorescence traces.
