From "Allen Brain Observatory: Visual Behavior 2P Technical Whitepaper"

CHANGE DETECTION TASK
The Visual Behavior dataset is built upon a change detection behavioral task. Briefly, in this go/no-go task, mice are presented with a continuous series of briefly presented stimuli and they earn water rewards by correctly reporting when the identity of the image changes. Mice undergo standardized training in the behavior facility prior to imaging, in which they first learn to detect orientation changes using static grating stimuli, then transition to flashed gratings, and subsequently learn to detect changes in the identity of natural scene images. Each session included 8 images, for a total of 64 possible transitions. The images used in this study were a selected subset of the natural scenes stimulus set used in the Visual Coding Allen Brain Observatory.

2-PHOTON CALCIUM IMAGING
This dataset includes single- and multi-plane 2-photon calcium imaging recordings from the visual cortex of transgenic mice expressing the calcium indicator GCaMP6 in populations of excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Microscopes include Scientifica VivoScope systems for single-plane imaging, or a modified Mesoscope system (Multiscope) for multi-plane imaging.

EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Once mice are well-trained in the task, they transition to performing the task while being imaged with a 2-photon microscope to enable simultaneous measurement of neural activity and behavior. During the imaging portion of the experiment, mice perform the task with the set of eight natural scene images they viewed during training, as well as a novel set of eight images that they had not seen before, in separate sessions. This allows evaluation of the impact of novelty on neural coding for stimulus and behavioral information. Mice also undergo passive viewing sessions during the imaging stage, where the mice are given their daily water before the session (and are thus satiated) and view the task stimuli with the lick spout retracted so they are unable to earn water rewards. Lastly, during imaging sessions only, stimuli were omitted with a 5% probability, disrupting the expected cadence of flashed image presentations. Stimulus changes and the stimulus immediately preceding the change were never omitted.

DATASET VARIANTS
To ensure that any observed effects of stimulus novelty are due to lack of experience with those images, rather than properties of the specific images that were used, we trained some mice with the opposite stimulus configuration such that the training set for these mice was the image set that was novel for a different group of mice (compare dataset variants VisualBehavior and VisualBehaviorTask1B in Figure 5). This control was performed using the single-plane 2-photon imaging system.

DATA STRUCTURE AND TERMINOLOGY
Due to our experimental design, involving repeated imaging of the same population of cells over multiple days, the use of both single- and multi-plane imaging systems, and our strict quality control (QC) criteria that result in failures & retakes of specific session types, the complete 2-photon dataset for a given mouse can take many forms. The terminology described below is used to reference different subsets of the dataset, and these definitions apply to terms used in the AllenSDK, associated data manifest tables, and contents of NWB files.

The data collected in a single continuous recording is defined as a session. For single-plane imaging experiments, there is only one imaging plane (referred to as an experiment) per session. For multi-plane imaging experiments, there can be up to 8 imaging planes (8 experiments) per session. Due to our QC process, not all multi-plane imaging sessions have exactly 8 experiments, as some imaging planes did not meet our QC criteria. We aimed to track the activity of single neurons across multiple session types (familiar and novel image sets, passive and active behavior sessions; described in the overview) by targeting the same population of neurons over multiple recording sessions, with only one session recorded per day for a given mouse. The collection of imaging sessions for a given population of cells, belonging to a single imaging plane measured across days, is called a container. A container can include between 3 and 11 separate sessions for a given imaging plane. Accordingly, the session types available for a given container (corresponding to a specific imaging plane) can vary. Mice imaged with the multi-plane 2-photon microscope can have multiple containers, one for each of the 8 imaging planes recorded by the Multiscope (after data quality review, some of the containers may fail and be removed from the dataset). Thus, each mouse can have one or more containers, each representing a unique imaging plane (experiment) that has been targeted across multiple recording sessions, under different behavioral and sensory conditions (session types).

SECTION D: BEHAVIOR
The Change Detection task is a go/no-go task wherein mice are presented with a continuous series of flashed stimuli and they earn water rewards by correctly reporting when the identity of the flashed image changes.

CHANGE DETECTION TASK
Overview: Mice were trained for 1 hour/day, 5 days/week using a behavioral program implementing a go/no-go change detection task schematized in Figure 1. Briefly, mice were trained to lick a reward spout when the identity of a flashed visual stimulus changed identity. If mice responded correctly within a short, post-change response window (150-750ms before compensating for monitor display lag) a water reward was delivered. The volume of contingent rewards was 10uL in Stages 1 and 2, and reduced to 7uL after the first 3 sessions of Stage 3. The four stages of the training protocol are shown in Table 1

On Day 1 of the automated training protocol (shown in Figure 3) mice received a short, 15-min "open loop" session during which non-contingent water rewards were delivered coincident with 90° changes in orientation of a full-field, static square-wave grating (Stage 0). This session was intended to 1) introduce the mouse to the fluid delivery system and, 2) provide the technician an opportunity to identify the optimal lick spout position for each mouse. Each session thereafter was run in "closed loop", and progressed through 3 stages of the operant task: 1) static, full-field square wave gratings (oriented at 0° and 90°, with the black/white transition always centered on the screen and the phase chosen randomly on every trial), 2) flashed, full-field square-wave gratings (0° and 90°, with phase as described in 1), and 3) flashed full-field natural scenes (8 natural images used in the Allen Brain Observatory, http://observatory.brain-map.org/visualcoding). Once in the final stage of the task, mice were introduced to the additional session components that would be included during imaging sessions (5 min of gray screen immediately before and after the behavior session, as well as the final 5 min movie).

Progression through training stages: Starting with Stage 1, the advancement criteria required mice to achieve a session maximum performance of at least d-prime=2 (calculated over a rolling 100 trial window without trial count correction) during two of the last 3 sessions. The fastest progression from Stage 1 to Stage 3 was four training days.

Behavior session and trial structure: Each behavior session consisted of a continuous series of trials, schematized below.

Prior to the start of each trial a trial-type and change-time were selected. Trial-type was chosen based on predetermined frequencies such that "GO" and "CATCH" trials occurred with specified probabilities. In stages 1 and 2, the catch probability was ~36%. In stages 3 and above, the catch probability was initially ~30%. However, later sessions implemented a matrix sampling algorithm that ensured that each image transition was sampled equally, pushing the actual catch probability to ~12.5%. Change-times were selected from a truncated exponential distribution ranging from 2.25 to 8.25 seconds (mean of 4.25 seconds) following the start of a trial. Due to computational lag when aligning change-time with a stimulus flash, the actual distribution of change times was shifted to the right by one 750ms flash cycle (with only a small fraction of changes occurring at 2.25 seconds) resulting in a mean change time of 4.2 seconds. In trials when a mouse licked prior to the stimulus change the trial was reset, and a timeout period was imposed. The number of times a trial could be reset before re-drawing the timing parameter was limited to five. In all, this trial structure leads to a sampling of "GO" and "CATCH" trials, that when combined with mouse responding, yields "HIT", "MISS", "FALSE ALARM", and "CORRECT REJECTION" trials.

In addition to the four trial types described above, behavior sessions contained a subset of "free reward" trials ("GO" trials followed immediately by delivery of a non-contingent reward). Behavior sessions across all phases began with 5 "free-reward" trials. Additionally, in order to promote continued task performance throughout the behavior session "free reward" trials were delivered after 10 consecutive "MISS" trials. All non-contingent rewards were 5uL in volume.

Transition to Imaging: Mice were deemed to be "transition ready" when they had achieved the following performance criteria during the final phase of behavior:
1. A peak d-prime of >1 for three consecutive sessions
2. At least 100 HIT and/or MISS trials on three consecutive sessions
If at any time during the final stage of behavior mice did not meet these criteria they would become "lapsed" until they met the criteria and returned to "transition ready". Additionally, due to operational constraints, mice were sometimes not immediately transitioned to the imaging phase of the experiment despite having met the criteria.

BEHAVIOR METRICS
Hit and false alarm rates: The hit rate was calculated as the fraction of go-trials in which the mouse licked in a 0.150 to 0.750 second window following the non-display-lag-compensated image display time. On Catch trials, a response window was defined as a 0.150 to 0.750 second window following the sham change. False alarm rates were calculated as the fraction of catch-trials in which animal emitted a lick in this response window. Reaction times were recalculated post-hoc after accounting for the calculated display lag, which ranged from ~20-35 ms. Due to variability in the display lag calculations, the minimum and maximum reaction times that resulted in trial classification (hit/miss/false-alarm/correct-rejection) will vary from session to session.

The AllenSDK returns hit rates, false alarm rates, and d-prime calculated over a rolling 100 trial window, excluding aborted trials (trials where the animal responded before the stimulus change). The reward rate is calculated over a 25 trial rolling window and provides a measure of the rewards earned per unit time (in units of rewards/minute). This provides a rough proxy for task engagement, with periods of high reward rates indicating engagement in the visual task. Low reward rates can indicate either disengagement (lack of responses), or extremely high rates of anticipatory licking (thereby continually delaying stimulus changes). In cases where the SDK has labeled epochs as either 'engaged' or 'disengaged', this corresponds to reward rates above and below 2 rewards per minute.

The animal's running speed was monitored using an analog encoder mounted at the center of the 6.5" (16.5 cm) diameter flat running wheel (see section APPARATUS for details). The encoder was provided with a continuous 5V reference voltage (v_in). A reference signal (v_sig), along with the actual value of v_in, was read from the encoder at discrete sampling intervals and logged to the data file. The ratio of v_sig to v_in corresponded to the position of the encoder relative to a zero-point. For example, v_sig/v_in = 0 corresponds to 0 degrees, v_sig/v_in = 0.5 corresponds to 180 degrees, etc. As the encoder crossed its zero-point (v_sig/v_in = 1.0), v_sig returned to 0. The rotational speed of the encoder was then accessible as the change in position since the last encoder measurement divided by the time interval since the last measurement (i.e., the derivative). The rotational speed was translated to a linear speed under the assumption that the mouse was running at a location 2/3 of the distance from the wheel center.

In practice, there were a few sources of error in the recordings including inconsistencies in the timing of the analog channel reads, spurious transients on the analog input channels, and inconsistencies in the derivative as the encoder crossed the zero-point. The following processing steps were followed to provide an estimate of the running speed despite these issues. All code for encoder processing and running speed calculation is visible in the brain_observatory.behavior.running_processing module of the AllenSDK. The value of v_sig was first 'unwrapped', to account for the crossings of the zero-point in the encoder and facilitate the derivate step to follow. This was accomplished by first removing any voltage values greater than 5.1 (to remove spurious transients), then identifying and compensating for the zero-crossing points (or 'wraps').

The voltage was converted to angular speed, in radians/s, by differentiating the unwrapped v_sig values, dividing by v_in, then multiplying by 2*pi. Angular speed was converted to linear speed using the above-described assumption of the animal's running position on the wheel as follows:
running_speed_cm_per_sec = angular_speed * (2/3 * wheel_radius)

Remaining transients at the wrap points were identified and removed by limiting the values at the wrap points to be within the range defined by all other data points in a +/- 0.25 second window. Any additional transients with z-score of 10 or greater were removed (set to NaN). Finally, inconsistencies in the analog channel read times were accounted for by smoothing the raw running speed with a 10 Hz lowpass Butterworth filter. Both the unfiltered (but wrap and transient corrected) and the filtered running speeds are available to end users as, respectively, the `running_speed_raw` and `running_speed` attributes. Below is the linear speed, in cm/s, for the same 10 second period shown above in Figure 5:

DATA SYNCHRONIZATION
Temporal synchronization of all data-streams (calcium imaging, visual stimulation, body and eye tracking cameras) was achieved by recording all experimental clocks on a single NI PCI-6612 digital IO board at 100 kHz (Figure 4). All input lines on the synchronization board were sampled simultaneously as a single 32-bit integer at 100 kHz (hardware-timed). To mitigate data size after collection, only changing events and their corresponding sample numbers were stored on a dedicated HDF5 file along with additional metadata.

Two-photon movies (512x512 pixels, 31 Hz for single plane and 512x512 pixels, 11 Hz for each plane in multi-plane experiments), eye tracking (30 Hz), and behavior (30 Hz) were recorded and continuously monitored. Recording sessions were ~1 hour long, but could be interrupted if any of the following was observed: 1) mouse stress as shown by excessive secretion around the eye, nose bulge, and/or abnormal posture; 2) excessive pixel saturation (>1000 pixels) as reported in a continuously updated histogram; 3) loss of baseline intensity caused by bleaching and/or loss of immersion water in excess of 20%; 4) hardware failures causing a loss of data integrity.

Each experimental session was for data integrity based on a broad range of operational parameters. A comprehensive report was automatically generated to track data trends, animal behavior, experimental failures and errors. To minimize bias, rig operators did not review their own experiments, a secondary operator was assigned to review the QC report.

Assessment of the following quality metrics was performed after each imaging session. Failure to meet any of these criteria resulted in the session being retaken on a subsequent day.
1. Image Saturation: Initial movie frames were assessed to confirm that photonic saturation did not exceed 1000 pixels and the full dynamic range of the recording system was adequately covered.
2. Photobleaching: Epochs of fluorescence at the beginning and end of a session were compared to ensure that baseline fluorescence did not drop greater than 20%.
3. Field of View Targeting Validation: Targeted imaging locations were checked against the intrinsic signal imaging data, using a registered coordinate system, to confirm that data was collected from the correct visual area.
4. Z-Axis Stability: Stability of image recording was assessed by comparing a windowed average image from the first and last 5 minutes of the experiment to a z-stack of images (+/- 30 μm around imaging site, 0.75 μm step) collected at the end of each experimental session to calculate the amount of drift that occurred over the session. Experiments with z-drift above 10μm over the course of the entire session were excluded.
5. Animal Stress: Behavior videos were viewed to confirm that animals did not show excessive signs of stress. Any animal that showed eye secretion covering the pupil or excessive orbital tightening was returned to its home cage to recover. The presence of nose bulge, flailing and abnormal postures was also monitored.
6. Task Performance: Behavior performance in the change detection task was confirmed to have met (or exceed) a peak d-prime of 1.0.
7. Temporal Sync: Temporal alignment of data streams was confirmed.
8. Hardware/Software Failure: Multiple datastreams and metrics were assessed to ensure that incoming data integrity was not compromised by hardware and/or software related errors
9. Excessive Motion: Imaging frames were checked for residual motion (after motion correction algorithms had been applied)
10. Interictal Events: Presence of interictal events was assessed by measuring the full field fluorescence and calculating the intensity spike prominence and width for the first 10,000 frames of the 2P movie. Experiments with a non-zero probability of interictal events were then checked manually in order to exclude any potentially epileptic mice (see Steinmetz et al., 2017).

A final, container-level QC assessment was performed once all data collection for a mouse was completed. This secondary assessment included assessing the following metrics:
1. Full Container Status: Containers (the set of imaging sessions for a given field of view) were confirmed to contain all required datasets.
2. Brain Health: 2-photon serial tomography sections were examined to assess general brain health. Health assessment includes checking for excessive bruising, brain abnormalities, deformities, necrotic tissue damage, and checking for any signs of laser damage.
3. Cell Matching: Imaging fields of view were checked across all experiments in a container to confirm successful targeting of the same field of view. This assessment was made visually, based on similarity in patterns of vasculature and the presence of clearly identifiable matched cells across sessions.

SECTION F: DATA PROCESSING

DEWARPING
To account for variation in scanning rate across each line in the 2p-imaging frame, due to the non-constant speed of the resonant scanner, data acquired with the Scientifica microscopes required a dewarping step (Multiscope instruments have built-in dewarping correction). Correcting for the warping in the image involves taking a subset of the warped image's columns, towards the edges of the image where the scanning speed is lower, and combining them using parameters derived from calibration data acquired with a standard grid image. To determine correct dewarping parameters, the grid image is adjusted until the dewarped grid is uniform. Each side of the image is dewarped independently.

The following equations are used to determine which columns are chosen from the warped image and how they are combined. The jth column of the dewarped image will be given by the formula:
col[j] = (1 + ⌊g[j − 1]⌋ − g[j − 1]) * input_image[⌊g[j − 1]⌋] + (g[j] − ⌊g[j]⌋) * input_image[⌊g[j]⌋]),
where
f(x) = x − int(b(1 − sin((x/(3a) + 1.0/6.0)π)) + 0.5), x ∈ [0, a]
g(x) = (x + 0.5) − b(1 − sin(((x + 0.5)/(3a) + 1.0/6.0)π)), x ∈ [0, a]

Notice that this is taking a linear combination of the two (generally, adjacent) columns of the original image, using the decimal parts of the g function as coefficients. If these ever end up being non-adjacent columns from the original image, then we also add the value of the skipped column to col[j]. In the event that both f[j] and g[j - 1] are not nonnegative, then we fill that column with the average from the original image. And if f is nonnegative but g is not, then we simply replace that column with the exact same column from the original image.

For each experiment, there are four parameters that tell us how much the image has been warped. These are called aL, aR, bL, and bR. The L and R refer to the side of the image which is being dewarped. In the equations above, a and b are replaced with their corresponding parameter, depending on whether you are dewarping the left side or the right side. The parameters aL and aR specify how far (in pixels) into the image the warping occurs. The parameters bL and bR are more a measure of how warped the image is in those areas.

MOTION CORRECTION
We used Suite2P v0.9.3 rigid registration for motion correction of 2-photon movies. Suite2P performs an iterative phase-correlation-based registration on a small subset of frames to generate a reference image from the average projection of those frames. The registration of the entire movie then proceeds with registration by phase correlation of each frame to this reference image. We saved Suite2P's registered output tiff stacks and concatenated them into a single hdf5 format compatible with the rest of our processing pipeline.

Suite2P's parameter maxregshift has a default value of 0.1, which clips lateral motions of more than 10% of the FOV dimension. We found a few examples in our release data where our experiments had real, long-timescale lateral shifts of greater than 10%. We increased the maxregshift parameter to 0.2, to allow for registration of these experiments. A consequence of this change was that up to 20% lateral shifts were allowed by Suite2P over short timescales as well. We observed that these short timescale shifts, often single frames, were likely not physical shifts, but struggles of the registration algorithm to register low signal-to-noise frames. Across an entire experiment, we monitor the worst-case shifts and establish a motion border which invalidates any ROI which touches it. To prevent too much inflation of the motion border exclusion area by these unphysical short timescale shifts, we detrended the x and y lateral corrections with a median filter over a 3 second window. We clip frame displacements to a +/-5% window around any outlier more than 5% above or below the detrended corrections was truncated to 5%. This allowed us to handle physical long timescale drifts and limit the impact of artifactual short timescale shifts. Any movie frames where the lateral shift was truncated were translated to the new truncated translation value.

For each movie, we produce the following outputs: the registered hdf5 movie for downstream processing, the motion correction shifts both from Suite2P directly and after our detrended clipping step, and Suite2P's output corrXY, the value of phase-correlation at the best alignment for each frame. For QC inspection, we generate plots showing the x and y lateral shifts and corrXY resulting from motion correction, as well as a video preview showing the movie before and after motion correction, side-by-side, averaged to 0.5 frames-per-second and a 10x playback speed.

CELL SEGMENTATION
OVERVIEW
The Visual Behavior 2P project used the same segmentation procedure that was developed for the Visual Coding 2P dataset, published in de Vries et al., 2020. The active cell segmentation module was designed to locate active cells within a field-of-view (FOV) by isolating cellular objects using the spatial and temporal information from the entire movie. The goal of the active cell segmentation module is to achieve robust performance across experimental conditions with no or little adjustment, such as different mouse cell lines, fluorescent proteins (e.g., GCaMP6f or GCaMP6s), and FOV locations of visual areas and depths. The process begins with the full image sequence as input to apply both the spatial as well as temporal information to isolate an individual active cell of interest without data reduction, such as by PCA, and does not make assumptions about the number of independent components existing in the active cell movie. Also, in contrast to other methods, this approach separates the individual steps, including identifying and isolating each cellular object, computing confidence of each identified object (by object classification) and the step of resolving objects overlapping in x-y space (which lead to cross talk in traces), so that each can be improved upon if necessary.

CROSSTALK REMOVAL IN MULTISCOPE DATA
Crosstalk between focal planes is a fundamental limitation in multiplexed microscopy systems, such as the Multiscope. Details about system hardware and methods used to optimize crosstalk in the data are described above and can be found in Lecoq et al., 2020. Crosstalk removal was performed on fluorescence traces using an ICA-based approach (implementation scikit-learn.FastICA), where independent components are estimated by minimizing Gaussianity of the data (Hyvärinen, 1999). The assumption is that the two planes are a mixed observation of two clean sources and are mixed linearly using a mixing matrix. We assume a mixing matrix of the form [[1-a, a], [b, 1-b]], where a and b are in [0,1), and probably around 0.15. After FastICA, we transform the resulting mixing matrix to be of this form to recover the proper scaling of the mixed signals. Prior to FastICA, data undergoes whitening; we do not use the built-in whitening of the FastICA module (as it appears to contain a bug that affects scaling of the outputs).

ROI FILTERING
Not all ROIs generated by segmentation are complete individual cell bodies. To exclude ROIs that are not actually cell bodies from further analysis, the ROIs are labeled with a multi-label classifier where any ROIs that end up labeled are not considered cell bodies. The set of reasons to exclude an ROI are: the ROI is a union of two or more cells; the ROI is a duplicate of another; the ROI is close to the edge of the FOV and is impacted by motion such that parts of the ROI are missing from the video; the ROI is likely an apical dendrite and not a cell body; or that the ROI is too small, too narrow, or too dim to confidently be considered a cell body.

The initial ROI filtering was generated by a set of heuristics based on depth, shape, area, intensity, signal-to-noise, and the ratio of mean to max intensity of the max projection. The initial filtering was used to generate a set of training labels, on which a multi-label classifier was trained. The multi-label classifier is implemented using a linear Support Vector Classifier trainer for each label (binary relevance) using metrics generated in segmentation combined with depth, driver, reporter, and targeted structure as features. The final ROI filtering workflow is to 1) label ROIs that fall within the motion cutoff regions at the border, 2) label ROIs using the binary relevance classifier, 3) label significantly overlapping ROIs as duplicates, and 4) label ROIs that significantly overlap two or more ROIs as unions.

DEMIXING TRACES FROM OVERLAPPING ROIS
The simplest way to extract fluorescence traces, given a set of ROI masks, is to average the fluorescence within each ROI. If two ROIs overlap, this procedure will artificially correlate their traces. Therefore, a model is used where every ROI has a trace which is distributed across its ROI in some spatially heterogeneous, time-dependent fashion:
F(it) = ∑_k W(kit) T(kt)
where W is a tensor containing time-dependent weighted masks: W(kit) measures how much of neuron k's fluorescence is contained in pixel i at time t. T(kt) is the fluorescence trace of neuron k at time t - this is the desired value to estimate. F(it) is the recorded fluorescence in pixel i at time t.

Importantly, this model applies to all ROIs, including those too small to be a neuron or otherwise filtered out. Duplicate ROIs (defined as two ROIs with >70% overlap) and ROIs that are the union of two other ROIs (any ROI where the union of any other two ROIs accounts for 70% of its area) are filtered out before demixing, and the remaining filtering criteria are applied after demixing. Projecting the movie (F) onto the binary masks (A) reduces the dimensionality of the problem from 512x512 pixels to the number of ROIs:
∑_i A(ki) F(it) = ∑_{k,i} A(ki) W(kit) T(kt)
where A(ki) is one if pixel i is in ROI k and zero otherwise–these are the ROI masks from segmentation, after filtering out duplicate and union ROIs. At a particular time point t, this yields the simple linear regression:
AF(t) = (AW^T(t)) T(t)
where the weighted masks W are estimated by the projection of the recorded fluorescence F onto the binary ROI masks A. On every imaging frame t, the linear least squares solution T̂ are computed to extract each ROI's trace at that time point.

It was possible for ROIs to have negative or zero demixed traces T̂. This occurred if there were union ROIs (one ROI composed of two neurons) or duplicate ROIs (two ROIs in the same location with approximately the same shape) that the initial detection missed. If this occurred, those ROIs and any that overlapped with them were removed from the experiment. This led to the loss of ~1% of ROIs.

NEUROPIL SUBTRACTION
The recorded fluorescence from an ROI was contaminated by the fluorescence of the neuropil immediately above and below the cell due to the point-spread function of the microscope. In order to correct for this contamination, the amount of contamination was estimated for each ROI. The estimated F_N was done by taking an annulus of 10 µm around the cellular ROI, excluding pixels from any other ROIs. In order to remove this contamination, the extent to which ROI was affected by its local neuropil signal was evaluated.

The recorded traces were modeled as F_M = F_C + rF_N, where F_C is the unknown true ROI fluorescence trace and F_N is the fluorescence of the surrounding neuropil. In order to estimate the contamination ratio r for each ROI, the error was minimized E = ⟨(F_C − (F_M − rF_N))² + λΛ(F_C)⟩_t by jointly optimizing for r and F_C. Λ(F_C) is the first temporal derivate of the cellular trace, weighted by λ = 0.05; this smoothness constraint on the cellular trace allows per-ROI optimization for r. ⟨·⟩_t denotes an average over time. Gradient descent was used on r. At each step of the gradient descent, F_C was solved at the zero gradient of E. Gradient descent was performed on the first half of the traces and computed E on the second, so that it is a cross-validation error. After computing r and F_C for an ROI, the neuropil-subtracted trace F_M − rF_N was used as the basis for all subsequent analysis in order to avoid any residual effects of the smoothness constraint.

To standardize the learning rate and initial conditions of the gradient descent, each ROI's neuropil trace was normalized to (0,1). The measured ROI trace was normalized by the same amount, used a learning rate of 10 and initial condition of r = 0.001. The gradient descent was stopped at the first local minimum of E. If the resulting r was greater than 1 or less than 0, or final cross-validation error E greater than 2|⟨F_M⟩_t|, the gradient descent was attempted again with a 10x slower learning rate. If those convergence criteria were still not met, an initial condition of r = 0.5 was used. If those convergence criteria were still not met, that ROI was flagged and after computing r for all other ROIs in the experiment, set r for un-converged ROIs to the mean.

DF/F CALCULATION
We return normalized, detrended traces of neuronal activity by performing the following algorithm on each trace. First, we estimate the standard deviation of the noise in the trace. We do this by centering the trace on the curve resulting from applying a median filter with kernel size 3.33 seconds to the trace. To avoid including signal events in our estimate of noise, we discard any values that exceed 1.5 times the absolute value of the minimum of this centered trace. We make a first estimate of the standard deviation of noise in the trace as 1.4826 times the median absolute deviation of this truncated, centered trace. We further discard any values that exceed 2.5 times this first estimate of the standard deviation and finally return 1.4826 times the median absolute deviation of the remaining centered trace values as the standard deviation of noise in the trace.

Next, we calculate the dF/F trace. We define the baseline activity in the trace as the result of applying a median filter with kernel size 600s to the trace. We subtract this baseline from the raw trace and normalize the difference by the baseline. At timesteps where the baseline trace is less than the standard deviation of noise calculated above, we normalize by the standard deviation of noise, instead. This gives the dF/F trace.

Finally, we detrend the dF/F trace. We estimate the trend in the dF/F trace by applying a median filter with kernel length 3.33 seconds. To prevent anomalously large trends from arising, we use the same algorithm we used to estimate the standard deviation of noise in the raw trace to estimate the standard deviation of noise in the dF/F trace. We constrain the trend to never exceed 2.5 times this estimated standard deviation of noise in the dF/F trace. We subtract the trend from the dF/F trace and report this as the detrended dF/F trace.

SESSION TO SESSION CELL MATCHING
Multiple 2-photon calcium imaging movies were acquired for each imaging plane across multiple imaging sessions. To map cells between sessions, we used an automated matching algorithm. The module has 4 steps:
1. Determining the spatial transform between each pair of sessions using image alignment techniques on the average projection images of the sessions.
2. Applying the derived spatial transform to segmented cell masks.
3. For each pair of sessions, solving the linear assignment problem (i.e. bipartite graph matching) to determine which pairs of masks are most likely to be related.
4. A graph combination method was used to join all the bipartite graphs to determine the most likely label sets that match across all sessions.

Determining the spatial transformation
The module first used an intensity-based method to register the average intensity projection images of each pair of sessions, producing a Euclidean transformation that registered each image pair. We found that a single image registration strategy did not work for all cases. In some cases, the true lateral shifts between two experiments were too large for the ECC registration algorithm. In other cases, the border in the projection images biased the registration towards matching borders and not cell soma. In still other experiments, a histogram equalization step that helped most experiments resulted in a degraded registration.

We implemented a "meta-registration" where 4 different registration sequences were attempted. Each sequence employed an initial cropping step to eliminate the motion border problem. The sequences employed varying combinations of ECC, PhaseCorrelation, and contrast adjustment. After each of the 4 sequences were attempted, we chose the best candidate based on the structural similarity metric (SSIM) between the two registered images. If none of the candidate sequences improved SSIM beyond that achieved with unregistered images, we flagged the registration as a failure for QC inspection.

In a few cases, there were still some unexplained failures to register. In these cases, we found that the average projection intensity images had low contrast, but the maximum projection intensity images had more visible features. By substituting in the maximum projections for the registration step, we achieved good registration and good cell matching for these containers.

Applying the spatial transformation to cell masks
The cell masks were materialized into a set of images, such that no ROIs overlapped in any one image. We then applied the relative transformation found from the intensity projections to these materialized images, to get the cell masks in an aligned space.

Solving the linear assignment problem between 2 sessions
To map cells, a bipartite graph matching algorithm (the Blossom method) was used to find correspondence of cells between sessions. The algorithm used cell labels in the pair-wise experiments as nodes, and the edges of the graph were weighted with weights, w:
w = d/d_max + (1.0 − I/U)
where d is the distance between the 2 mask centroids (in pixels), d_max = 10 pixels, I is the number of pixels that are shared between the 2 masks (the intersection), and U is the total number of pixels covered by the two masks combined (the union). The graph edge for any pair of masks with d > 10 pixels was assigned a very large weight, eliminating that pair as a candidate match.

The original version of this module used the "Hungarian" method to minimize the total weight. SciPy has an equivalent implementation of that method. We found that the solution from the "Blossom" method was more robust to order permutations of the inputs. We used the networkx implementation of the "Blossom" method. As this implementation seeks to maximize total weight, we inverted the weights, taking care to prevent division-by-zero:
w = 1 / (1 + w)

By maximizing the summed weights of edges, the bipartite matching algorithm found the "best match" between cells in each pair of experiments.

Joining the pairwise bipartite graphs
All the pairwise bipartite graphs were naively combined. This combined graph is not constrained to avoid labeling conflicts.

Matching was performed on the full set of ROIs identified by the segmentation algorithm, but ROIs that were deemed invalid by the ROI filtering step were not included in the final set of matched cells. For quality control checks, we produced standard plots of pairwise registrations across sessions (Figure 12), as well as quantification of the fraction of ROIs matched across sessions (Figure 13). Session pairs with visible failures to register (clear features in the image were not aligned), or with very low fraction of matched cells (<10% matching between session pairs), were manually evaluated and an attempt was made to optimize the registration process to produce accurate registration. Session pairs that were not possible to register were excluded from the dataset.

From "Behavioral strategy shapes activation of the Vip-Sst disinhibitory circuit in visual cortex"

We used the Allen Institute Visual Behavior—2p calcium imaging dataset to examine how the activity of Vip, Sst, and excitatory cells depends on strategy during a change detection task.41,42 This dataset contains behavior from 376 imaging sessions from 82 mice, thus permitting analysis of behavioral diversity. We used a dynamic logistic regression model7 to identify the strategies used by mice. We find individual mice have stable mixtures of a visual comparison strategy and a statistical timing strategy. Vip, Sst, and excitatory cells recorded from mice predominantly using each strategy show dramatic differences in activity. Further, the effects of strategy were independent from task engagement and stimulus novelty. Finally, we show that strategy differences can be succinctly described by the degree of activation of the Vip-Sst disinhibitory circuit.

We analyzed the Allen Institute Visual Behavior—2p calcium imaging dataset,42 which contains 2-photon calcium imaging recordings from transgenic mice expressing the calcium indicator GCaMP6f in excitatory neurons (Slc17a7-IRES2-Cre;Camk2a-tTa;Ai93), Sst inhibitory neurons (Sst-IRES-Cre;Ai148), and Vip inhibitory neurons (Vip-IRES-Cre;Ai148). The data were collected using standardized data collection and processing.41,43 During imaging, head-fixed mice performed a visual change detection task (Figure 1A). Mice were shown a series of natural images (250 ms stimulus duration) interspersed with periods of a gray screen (500 ms inter-stimulus duration). This task uses a roving baseline paradigm, whereby an individual image repeats a variable number of times before a new image is presented and then itself repeats. Mice were given a water reward for licking in response to image changes. Premature licking delayed the time of the next image change. To serve as distractors, 5% of image repeats were omitted and replaced with a continuation of the gray screen for the same duration as image presentations. Image changes as well as the image immediately before the change were not omitted. Mice performed the task on a running disk. Running was “open loop” with respect to task progression and mice were free to run or not run without influence on stimulus or reward generation. Mice typically ran between licking bouts and stopped running during licking and reward consumption (see Figure S16). Mice learned the task through a standardized training pipeline and were selected for imaging based on a consistent criteria of minimum task performance.

Two-photon calcium imaging was performed in transgenic mice expressing the calcium indicator GCaMP6f in specific cell populations: excitatory neurons, Sst inhibitory neurons, and Vip inhibitory neurons. Recent work proposed a taxonomy in which excitatory neurons and GABAergic neurons are classes, and Sst and Vip neurons are subclasses, of GABAergic neurons.46 For simplicity, we refer to excitatory, Sst, and Vip as cell classes. The dataset contains recordings collected while mice performed the task with both familiar and novel stimuli41; we restricted our analysis to familiar stimuli (see Figures S20 and S21).
Our dataset contains 8,619 excitatory cells (21 imaging sessions, 9 mice), 470 Sst cells (15 imaging sessions, 6 mice), and 1,239 Vip cells (21 imaging sessions, 9 mice). These cell classes are thought to form a microcircuit whereby Sst and Vip reciprocally inhibit each other (Figure 4B). We performed our analyses on discrete calcium events that were regressed from the raw fluorescence traces, thus removing the slow decay dynamics of the calcium indicator GCaMP6f (Figure 4C). The extracted calcium events are of variable magnitude and correspond to a transient increase in internal calcium levels.

Data selection
The collection and processing of all data in the study was previously described in Garrett et al41 and is available at https://portal.brain-map.org/explore/circuits/visual-behavior-2p. For our behavioral analysis we used all active behavioral sessions from mice in the V1 and LM datasets across all image set experience levels (familiar images, novel images, and repeated exposure to novel images). For all analyses we combined mice trained on image sets A and B. For neural analysis we used neurons recorded during familiar image set presentations on the multi-plane imaging rig. Except where noted we combined across cells from V1 and LM and across cortical depths.

Mouse training
As described in Garrett et al.41 the training pipeline consisted of 7 stages before imaging:
•
Training 0 - Mice learned to lick for rewards
•
Training 1 - Mice earned rewards when a static grating changed orientation
•
Training 2 - Static gratings were interleaved with a gray screen
•
Training 3 - Static gratings are replaced with natural images
•
Training 4 - Rewards decrease in size, and free rewards are no longer given when the mouse misses 10 changes in a row
•
Training 5 - Performance must be consistently above a minimum threshold
•
Habitation - Mice performed the task on the imaging rig
•
Imaging - Mice performed the task with familiar images, then with novel images. Imaging was also performed during passive viewing of the same stimulus, which was not analyzed here.
Our main figures analyze the mouse behavior during the imaging sessions. See Figure S7 for mouse behavior over training.

Behavioral data processing
We performed all of our behavioral analysis after assigning behavioral events to each image presentation interval. By image presentation interval we refer to the 750 ms interval beginning with each image presentation. For image omissions we used the 750 ms following the time of the omission, when the image should have been presented. Licks were segmented into licking bouts using an inter-lick interval of 700 ms. This threshold was determined by visual inspection of the histogram of inter-lick intervals. The start and end of each licking bout was then assigned to an image presentation interval.

Neural data
For all analysis of neural data we used the detected calcium events as described in Garrett et al.41 and https://portal.brain-map.org/explore/circuits/visual-behavior-2p. This process produces, for each cell, a set of calcium events each with a time and magnitude. Except where noted we used familiar image set sessions collected on the multiplane calcium imaging rig.

Decoding analysis
To decode task signals on an image by image basis we used a random forest classifier to predict either image changes versus repeats (change decoder), or hits versus misses (hit decoder). We iterated over the number, n, of simultaneously recorded neurons used in the decoding analysis. For each imaging plane we sampled neurons and performed decoding until there was a 99% probability all neurons had been used in decoding. For each sample we took n neurons without replacement and concatenated their neural activity on each image presentation to make a k x nt matrix X. Here k is the number of images, and t is the number of timesteps from each neuron on each image. The change decoder used each image change and the image repeat immediately before the image change. The hit decoder used all image changes. We then performed 5-fold cross validated decoding using the RandomForestClassifier package from sklearn.58 We evaluated decoder performance as the percentage of test-set images correctly classified. We averaged the performance of all samples from the same imaging plane and report summary statistics as the mean +/- SEM over imaging planes. We computed the correlation between the change decoder’s predictions and the animal’s choices using the phi coefficient.
