From "Exploiting correlations across trials and behavioral sessions to improve neural decoding"

Our goal is to decode behavior y \in R^P from spike-sorted, temporally binned spike counts. For each trial k, neural activity has size N x T, where N is the number of neurons and T the number of time steps. Recordings are split into 2-s trials, each divided into 20-ms bins, producing T = 100 time steps. For each trial, we constructed X \in R^{N x T}  by aggregating spike counts and used it to compute a decoder estimate of the true behavior y \in R^P. y is constant within a trial (“per-trial decoding”); when P = T, y varies across time (“per-timestep decoding”).

We apply our models to 433 IBL sessions,17 covering 270 brain regions and four behavioral variables: choice, prior, wheel speed, and whisker motion energy.

 In the IBL experiments, mice rotate a wheel to indicate the location of a visual stimulus, defined as their choice (Figure 1A). For the first 90 trials, the stimulus appears randomly on either side with equal probability; in subsequent trials, it appears predominantly on one side in blocks. Mice adapt their behavior to these changing probabilities, allowing estimation of each mouse’s trial-by-trial prior belief (prior) about stimulus location. Additionally, wheel speed and whisker motion energy near the whisker pad are recorded. Whisker motion energy is computed as the mean absolute difference between adjacent video frames within a bounding box anchored between nose tip and eye. Choice and prior are static within a trial, while wheel speed and whisker motion energy are time-varying signals sampled at 60 Hz. See STAR Methods sections “data processing” and “hyperparameter selection” for details.

Data processing

IBL trial-aligned dataset

For choice, we align trials to the stimulus onset, considering neural activity from 0.5 s before to 1.5 s post-onset. For prior, we also align trials to the stimulus onset, including neural activity from 0.6 s to 0.1 s pre-onset. The prior represents the mice’s estimate of the stimulus side probability. We use the same decoding window as in the previous study,27 focusing on the period with minimal wheel movements. Within each trial, we segment neural activity into 50-ms non-overlapping time bins. For each time bin, we bin spike counts using all neurons, sorted by Kilosort 2.5,77 from each session. For dynamic behaviors (wheel speed and whisker motion energy), we select the first movement onset as the alignment event, and decode the behavior starting at the alignment event and ending at 1 s after the alignment event. The neural activity within each trial is binned into non-overlapping 20 ms bins. For each time bin, we similarly bin spike counts using all neurons from each session.

IBL trial-unaligned dataset

We focus only on wheel speed and whisker motion energy, as variables like choice and prior are only defined during experimental trials, which are periods when stimuli are presented and mice respond for rewards. Unlike the trial-aligned dataset, we do not align neural activity and behavior to a specific event onset. Instead, we segment the continuous Neuropixels recordings into 2-s snippets to construct the trial-unaligned dataset for each session. These snippets cover intervals both during and outside experimental trials, capturing the repetitive, structured behaviors within trials as well as the more spontaneous behaviors outside of trials.

From "A brain-wide map of neural activity during complex behaviour"

We trained 139 mice (94 male and 45 female) on the International Brain Laboratory (IBL) decision-making task (Fig. 1a,b). On each trial, a visual stimulus appeared to the left or right on a screen, and the mouse had to move it to the centre by turning a wheel with its front paws within 60 s (Fig. 1c). After an initial 90 unbiased trials, the prior probability for the stimulus to appear on the left or right side was constant over a block of trials at a ratio of 20:80% (right block) or 80:20% (left block). Blocks lasted for between 20 and 100 trials, which were drawn from a truncated geometric distribution (empirical mean of 51 trials). Block changes were not cued. Stimulus contrast was uniformly sampled from 5 possible values (100, 25, 12.5, 6.25 and 0%). The 0% contrast trials, when no stimulus was presented, were assigned to a left or right side following the probability distribution of the block. This allowed mice to perform above chance by incorporating this prior in their choices. Following a wheel turn, mice received positive feedback in the form of a water reward, or negative feedback in the form of a white-noise pulse and a 2-s time out. The next trial began after a delay, followed by a quiescence period during which the mice had to hold the wheel still.

Recordings

In these mice, we inserted 699 Neuropixels probes (see an example of one recording of three trials in Fig. 1i), following a grid that covered the left hemisphere of the forebrain and midbrain, which typically represent stimuli or actions on the contralateral side, and the right hemisphere of the cerebellum and hindbrain, which typically represent the ipsilateral side (Fig. 2a). Recordings were collected by 12 laboratories in Europe and the USA, with most recordings using 2 simultaneous probe insertions. To ensure reproducibility, one brain location was targeted in every mouse in every laboratory, as described elsewhere25. Only sessions with at least 400 trials were retained for further analyses. Data were uploaded to a central server, preprocessed and shared through a standardized interface. To perform spike sorting on the recordings, we used a version of Kilosort with custom additions. This process produced 621,733 units (including multineuron activity), averaging 889 per probe. To separate individual neurons from clusters of multineuron activity, we then applied stringent quality-control metrics (based on those described in ref. 15), which identified 75,708 well-isolated neurons, averaging 108 per probe.

Methods

n brief, at the beginning of each trial, the mouse was required to not move the wheel for a quiescence period of 400–700 ms. After the quiescence period, a visual stimulus (Gabor patch) appeared on either the left or right (±35° azimuth) of the screen, with a contrast randomly sampled from a predefined set (100, 25, 12.5, 6 or 0%). A 100-ms tone (5-kHz sine wave) was played at stimulus onset. Mice had 60 s to move the wheel and make a response. Stimuli were yoked to the rotation of the response wheel, such that a 1-mm movement of the wheel moved the stimulus by 4 visual degrees. A response was registered if the centre of the stimulus crossed the  ±35° azimuth line from its original position. If the mouse correctly moved the stimulus 35° to the centre of the screen, it immediately received a 3-μl reward; if it incorrectly moved the stimulus 35° away from the centre, it received a time out. If the mouse responded incorrectly or failed to reach either threshold within the 60-s window, a white-noise burst was played for 500 ms and the inter-trial interval was between 1 and 1.5 s. In trials for which the visual stimulus contrast was set to 0%, the mouse had to respond as for any other trial by turning the wheel in the correct direction (assigned according to the statistics of the prevailing block) to receive a reward, but the mouse was not able to perceive whether the stimulus was presented on the left or right side of the screen. The mouse also received feedback (noise burst or reward) on 0% contrast trials.

Each session started with 90 trials in which the probability of a visual stimulus appearing on the left or right side was equal. Specifically, the 100%, 25%, 12.5% and 6% contrast trials were each presented 10 times on each side, and the 0% contrast was presented 10 times in total (that is, the ratio of the 100, 25, 12.5, 6 and 0% contrasts were set at 2, 2, 2, 2 and 1, respectively). The side (and thus correct movement) for the 0% contrast trials was chosen randomly between the right and left with equal probability. This initial block of 90 trials is referred to as the unbiased block (50:50).

After the unbiased block, trials were presented in biased blocks: in right-bias blocks, stimuli appeared on the right on 80% of the trials, whereas in left-bias blocks, stimuli appeared on the right on 20% of the trials. The ratio of the contrasts remained as above (2:2:2:2:1). Whether the first biased block in a session was left or right was randomly chosen, and blocks were then alternated. The length of a block was drawn from an exponential distribution with scale parameter of 60 trials, but truncated to lie between 20 and 100 trials.

The automated shaping protocol for training involved two collections of sessions. In the first session, the animals started performing a version of the task without biased blocks and were then progressively introduced to harder stimuli with weaker contrasts as they became progressively more competent. They also experienced a debiasing protocol, which was intended to dissuade them from persisting with just one of the choices. Once they were performing sufficiently well on all non-zero contrasts, they were faced with the biased blocks. When, in turn, performance on those was adequate (including on 0% contrast trials, which are informed by the block), they graduated to recording. Supplementary Figure 8a shows a joint histogram of the number of sessions the mice took in the first and second collections (these were not correlated). Supplementary Figure 8b shows a joint histogram of the number of sessions the mice took in the second collection and the performance during the recording sessions. These were also not correlated.

Inclusion criteria

We applied a set of inclusion criteria to sessions, probes and neurons to ensure data quality. Supplementary Table 1 lists the consequences of these criteria for the number of sessions and probes that passed the criteria.
Sessions and insertions

Each Neuropixels insertion was repeated in at least two laboratories, with reproducibility of outcomes across laboratories verified with extensive analyses that we have previously reported25.

Sessions were included in the data release if the mice performed at least 250 trials, with a performance of at least 90% correct on 100% contrast trials for both left and right blocks, and, to be able to analyse the feedback variable, if there were at least 3 trials with incorrect choices (after applying the trial exclusions below). Furthermore, sessions were included in the release only if they reached threshold on a collection of hardware tests (definitions are available from GiHub (https://int-brain-lab.github.io/iblenv/_autosummary/ibllib.qc.task_metrics.html)).

Insertions were excluded if the neural data failed the whole recording per visually assessed criteria of the ‘Recording Inclusion metrics and Guidelines for Optimal Reproducibility’ (RIGOR) from ref. 25, by presenting major artefacts (see examples in ref. 28) or if the probe tract could not be recovered during the histology procedure. Furthermore, only insertions for which alignments had been resolved (see appendix 6 of ref. 25 for definitions) were used in this study.

After applying these criteria, a total of 459 sessions, 699 insertions and 621,733 neurons remained, constituting the publicly released dataset.
Trials

For the analyses presented here, trials were excluded if one of the following trial events could not be detected: choice, probabilityLeft, feebackType, feeback times, stimON times and firstMovement times. Trials were further excluded if the time between stimulus onset and the first movement of the wheel (the first wheel-movement time) were outside the range of 0.08–2.00 s.
Neurons and brain regions

Neurons generated by the spike-sorting pipeline were excluded from the analyses presented here if they failed one of the three criteria described in ref. 28 (the single unit computed metrics of RIGOR25): amplitude > 50 μV; noise cut-off < 20 μV; and refractory period violation. Neurons that passed these criteria were termed well-isolated neurons (or often just ‘neurons’) in this study. Out of the 621,733 units collected, 75,708 were considered well-isolated neurons. Final analyses were additionally restricted to regions that were designated grey matter in the adult mouse Allen Common Coordinate framework6, contained at least five well-isolated neurons per session and were recorded from in at least two such sessions.

Video analysis

We briefly describe the video analysis pipeline (full details can be found in ref. 105). The recording rigs contained three cameras: one called ‘left’ at full resolution (1,280 × 1,024) and 60 Hz, filming the mouse from one side; one called ‘right’, filming the mouse symmetrically from the other side at half resolution (640 × 512) and 150 Hz; and one called ‘body’ at half resolution and 30 Hz, filming the body of the mouse from above. We developed several quality-control metrics to detect raw video issues such as poor illumination (as infrared light bulbs broke) or accidental misplacement of the cameras105.

We computed the motion energy (the mean across pixels of the absolute value of the difference between adjacent frames) of the whisker pad areas in the ‘left’ and ‘right’ videos (Fig. 1d). The whisker pad area was empirically defined using a rectangular bounding box anchored between the nose tip and the eye, both found using DeepLabCut106 (DLC; see more below). This metric quantifies motion in the whisker pad area and has a temporal resolution of the respective camera.

We also performed markerless pose estimation of body parts using DLC31, which is used in a fully automated pipeline in IBL (v.2.1) to track various body parts such as the paws, nose, tongue and pupil (Fig. 1d). In all analyses using DLC estimates, we excluded predictions with likelihood < 0.9. Furthermore, we developed several quality-control metrics for the DLC traces105.

Overview of decoding

We performed a decoding analysis to measure how much information the activity of populations of neurons contained about task variables such as stimulus side and choice. To do this we, used cross-validated, maximum-likelihood regression with L1 regularization (to zero out the contribution from noisy neurons). The neural regressors were defined by binning the spike counts from each neuron in each session in a given region in a specific time window on each trial. The duration of the time window, the number of bins in that time window (that is, the bin size) and the trial event to which it was aligned depended on the variable that is the target of our regression (Supplementary Table 2). These factors are discussed further below and include a variety of behavioural and task variables: stimulus side, choice, feedback and wheel speed and velocity. Although a session may have included multiple probe insertions, we did not perform decoding on these probes separately because they are not independent. Instead, neurons in the same session and region were combined across probes for our decoding analysis. Decoding was cross-validated and compared with a null distribution to test for significance. A given region may have been recorded on multiple sessions; therefore, in the main figures (Figs. 4–7) the region P value was defined by combining session P values using Fisher’s combined probability test, and the region effect size was defined by subtracting the median of the null distribution from the decoding score and reporting the median of the resulting values across sessions. The P values for all regions were then subjected to FDR correction for multiple comparisons at q = 0.01.

Decoding target variables

Stimulus side, choice and feedback were treated as binary target variables for logistic regression. For stimulus side, trials that had zero contrast were excluded. We used the LogisticRegression module from scikit-learn111 (v.1.1.2) with 0.001 tolerance, 20,000 maximum iterations, “l1” penalty, “liblinear” solver and “fit_intercept” set to True. We balanced decoder classes by weighting samples by the inverse of the class frequency, 1/(2Pi,class). Decoding performance was evaluated using the balanced accuracy of classification, which is the average of the recall probabilities for the two classes. Supplementary Figure 9 shows histograms of the regression coefficients for all the variables.

Wheel values (speed and velocity) change over the course of a trial, unlike the previous decoding targets, and we therefore had to treat these target variables differently. We averaged wheel values in nonoverlapping 20-ms bins, starting 200 ms before first wheel-movement time and ending at 1,000 ms after first wheel-movement time. Spike counts were similarly binned. The target value for a given bin (ending at time t) was decoded from spikes in a preceding (causal) window spanning W bins (ending at times t, …, t-W). Therefore, if decoding from n neurons, there were (W + 1)n predictors of the target variable in a given bin. In practice, we used W = 10. To decode these continuous-valued targets, we performed linear regression using the Lasso module from scikit-learn111 (v.1.1.2) with 0.001 tolerance, 1,000 maximum iterations and “fit_intercept” set to True. Decoding performance was evaluated using the R2 metric.
